Best practises blog (#377)
syntasso/kratix-docs: blog/2025-11-12-best-practises-for-writing-promises/index.mdx

scope for how Promises can be designed is vast; containers can be written in any language, workflows can be as segmented as you
would like and workflow actions can be imperative or declarative.

However, there are a number design practices and approaches to promise development that can make development and maintenance
easier for promise developers and make consuming services via Promises better for users.

In this blog post, we’re going design a promise with some core fundamentals in mind, paving the way for better debug-ability,
reliability and user clarity.

<!-- truncate -->

To get started, we’re going to bootstrap our Promise. We’ll be creating a Redis Promise to provision Redis instances as-a-service.
We’ll start by creating a new directory for our Promise and  will use the [kratix cli](/main/kratix-cli/intro) to bootstrap it. Run:

```bash
mkdir redis-promise

kratix init promise redis \
  --group mygroup.org \
  --kind Redis \
  --version v1alpha1
```

This creates a basic `promise.yaml` and an example resource request - `example-resource.yaml` - for your Promise. So far, this

> Promise doesn’t do much, let’s leverage an existing Redis operator to create instances of our Redis. To do this, the Redis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promise doesn't do much, let's leverage an existing Redis operator to create instances of our Redis. To do this, the Redis
```

To start, create a directory called `dependencies`:

```bash
mkdir dependencies
```

Then run the following to download the manifests for the redis dependencies and place them in the `dependencies` directory.

```bash
curl -L https://raw.githubusercontent.com/syntasso/kratix-marketplace/refs/heads/main/redis/internal/configure-pipeline/resources/dependencies/all-redis-operator-resources.yaml -o dependencies/operator-bundle.yaml

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/syntasso/kratix-marketplace/refs/heads/main/redis/internal/configure-pipeline/resources/dependencies/databases.spotahome.com_redisfailovers.yaml > dependencies/databases.spotahome.com_redisfailovers.yaml
```

We can now use the kratix cli to ensure these dependencies are installed when the Promise’s Configure Pipeline runs with the
`update dependencies` command:

```bash
kratix update dependencies dependencies --image ghcr.io/syntasso/redis-dependencies:v0.0.2
```

This command:

- Places the dependencies in the `workflows/promise/configure/dependencies/configure-deps/resources` directory
- Creates a Dockerfile that copies the contents of the resource directory into the `/kratix/outputs` directory so they will be

>   written to all appropriate destinations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  written to all appropriate Destinations
```

          - image: ghcr.io/syntasso/redis-dependencies:v0.0.2
            name: configure-deps
#highlight-end
    resource: {}
```

Now it is time to build the image that will run as part of the  `promise.configure` step. If you are running your cluster on kind,
you can build and load the image to your cluster with:

```bash
docker build --tag ghcr.io/syntasso/redis-dependencies:v0.0.1 workflows/promise/configure/dependencies/configure-deps

kind load docker-image ghcr.io/syntasso/redis-dependencies:v0.0.1 --name platform
```

We can now install this early iteration of the Promise!

```bash
kubectl apply --filename promise.yaml
```

You will soon see the Redis dependencies appearing on your worker cluster. Watch the the operator pod as it is created with:

```bash
kubectl get pods --context kind-worker --watch
```

You should eventually see output similar to the following:

```bash
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
redisoperator-7f584c6969-zc8sx   1/1     Running   0          41s
```

You now have a Promise that installs the Redis operator and its its dependencies but it does not yet provision Redis as-a-service

**Declarative Workflows**

> Whilst it would have been possible to install the operator and it’s dependencies with `kubectl apply` commands targeting the cluster,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whilst it would have been possible to install the operator and it's dependencies with `kubectl apply` commands targeting the cluster,
```

Within this workflow, we want to create a RedisFailover CR from the inputs provided by the user. There are a number of options
that can be configured in the RedisFailover CR but there are some defaults that we, as the Promise writers, want to enforce. The
only thing we want to users to be able to configure is the number of replicas and the name of their RedisFailover. 

We’ll take the name of the RedisFailover from the name of the user’s requests and the number of replicas from the API exposed by
the Promise. We’re going to wrap the number of replicas in a simple abstraction where `small` is one replica and `large` is three;
we can implement the logic for this in our workflow which we’ll introduce shortly. 

First, we’re going to update the Promise API to introduce the `size` property. We can do this with the `update api` command:

```bash
kratix update api --property size:string
```

You should see that the following has been added to the `promise.yaml`

```yaml
  api:
    apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
    kind: CustomResourceDefinition
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: null

>       name: rediss.mygroup.org

Reviewer: It's interesting that our command does this, because I'd expect the plural for Redis to be something like "Redises" or something like it.

    spec:
      group: mygroup.org
      names:
        kind: Redis
        plural: rediss
        singular: redis
      scope: Namespaced
      versions:
      - name: v1alpha1
        schema:
          openAPIV3Schema:
            properties:
              spec:
                properties:
                  size:
                    type: string
                type: object
            type: object
        served: true
        storage: true
```

We can now add a workflow that uses to this property. Again, we can use the kratix cli - this time with the `add container`
command:

```bash
kratix add container resource/configure/instance-configure --image ghcr.io/syntasso/redis-dependencies:v0.0.1 --language go
```

> This will have updated the `promise.yaml` to add a `resource.configure` workflow and have bootstrapped a Docker image that can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will update the `promise.yaml` to add a `resource.configure` workflow and bootstrap a Docker image that can be
```

Future feels to be more cohesive with the flow, as we expect the user to be executing these commands and receiving the results.

> built to run as part of this workflow. As we has specified that we want to use the [kratix-go sdk](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/syntasso/kratix-go) for this Promise via the `--language`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built to run as part of this workflow. As we specified that we want to use the [kratix-go sdk](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/syntasso/kratix-go) for this Promise via the `--language`
```

> flag, we also have a `pipeline.go` file. Update the script to contain the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flag, we also have a `pipeline.go` file, which we should update to contain the following:
```

These updates go into the pipeline file, right?

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed fetch 'size' property from request: %v", err)
	}
	
	var replicas int
	if size == "small" {
		replicas = 1
	}
	
	if size == "large" {
		replicas = 3
	}
	
	failoverTemplate := `apiVersion: databases.spotahome.com/v1
kind: RedisFailover
metadata:
  name: %s
  namespace: default
spec:
  redis:
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    replicas: %d
    customConfig:
      - "maxclients 100"
      - "hz 50"
      - "timeout 60"
      - "tcp-keepalive 60"
      - "client-output-buffer-limit normal 0 0 0"
      - "client-output-buffer-limit slave 1000000000 1000000000 0"
      - "client-output-buffer-limit pubsub 33554432 8388608 60"
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 400m
        memory: 500Mi
      requests:
        cpu: 100m
        memory: 100Mi
  sentinel:
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    replicas: %d
    customConfig:
      - "down-after-milliseconds 2000"
      - "failover-timeout 3000"
    resources:
      limits:
        memory: 100Mi
      requests:
        cpu: 100m
`
		redisContent := []byte(fmt.Sprintf(failoverTemplate, name, replicas, replicas))
	
		sdk.WriteOutput("redis_failover.yaml", redisContent)
}
```

> We’re going to execute this script when creating and updating a resource request. It will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're going to execute this script when creating and updating a resource request. It will:
```

Will the go files be executed as a script or compiled into a binary? It feels slightly odd to have it called as a script, so if we're executing the go files as scripts it'd be useful to mention it in an admonition.

1. Retrieve the name and size of the Redis from the resource request
2. Interpolate these in the template for the generated redis failover alongside the configured defaults
3. Write the RedisFailover CR to the `/kratix/output` directory so it can be written to a destination.

As this workflow is written declaratively, there will be no attempts to create the Redis after initial creation. It will only be
updated if there is a change in the specification of the resource.

**Idempotency**

Idempotency refers to the ability to run an action multiple times with the guarantee that there will be no additional effect of
running after it the initial action. In our case, if the resource configure workflow runs a second or third time, no additional
Redis instance will be created on these occasions. This is part of what having a declarative workflow enables. As the workflow

> describes the *desired* Redis instance, if the workflow re-runs for any reason, the Redis will not be created again. It will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
describes the *desired* Redis instance, if the workflow re-runs for any reason, this instance will not be created again. It will, 
```

Almost sure we will need a comma before however.

however, be updated if there are any changes to the request.

**Error Handling**

When writing Promise workflows, correct error handling is essential and we must ensure that, should an error occur, the container
exits with a non-zero exit code.

Take a look at this part of our script:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```go
```

	redisContent := []byte(fmt.Sprintf(failoverTemplate, name, size, size))
	sdk.WriteOutput("redis_failover.yaml", redisContent)	
```

The go SDK’s `WriteOutput` function returns an error if for any reason, we are unable to write output to a file. However, at
present, we are not checking if an error arises and do not exit if it does. In this form, the write could fail, the container

> would exit and we wouldn’t notice that something had gone wrong until the RedisFailover failed to appear on the destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
would exit and we wouldn't notice that something had gone wrong until the RedisFailover failed to appear on the Destination.
```

> Let’s mitigate against exactly this, update the workflow with the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's mitigate against exactly this by updating the workflow with the following code:
```

```bash
	redisContent := []byte(fmt.Sprintf(failoverTemplate, name, size, size))
	
	err = sdk.WriteOutput("redis_failover.yaml", redisContent)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed to write output: %v", err)
	}
```

The script will now exit with an error if one is returned by the `WriteOutput` function. Now, if the write fails it is immediately obvious from the execution of the workflow pod as it will fail.

**Informing users via the status**

When users make a request, as Promise writers we can be as specific as we would like about the information we would like to
surface to users about their request. For some resources, this can include details about how to access a given service with a url
or database string for instance. We’re going to do something more simple, when the `redis_failover.yaml` has been successfully
written to the outputs, we’re going to inform users that it is in the “Provisioning” stage so they know that their request is in
progress.

> We can do this with the SDK. Add the following to the end of the workflow script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can do this by updating the resource [Status](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status) through the SDK. Add the following to the end of the workflow script:
```

It's the same Status, right?

```bash
	status := kratix.NewStatus()
	status.Set("stage", "provisioning")
	if err := sdk.WriteStatus(status); err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed to write status: %v", err)
	}
```

This part of the workflow:

1. Creates a status 

> 2. Sets the key and value `stage: provisioning` on the status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Sets the key and value `stage: provisioning` on the Status
```

> 3. Writes the status as a `status.yaml` file to the `metadata` directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Writes the Status as a `status.yaml` file to the `metadata` directory
```

When the `status.yaml` file is written to the metadata directory, Kratix will automatically persist that information to the status
of the Resource. 

This  status-writing happens at the end of the workflow, but what if there is a failure earlier in the workflow? How can we inform
the user that something has gone wrong? In these error cases, we can update the status by patching the resource directly via the
API.

> Let’s revisit the previous example of error handling:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's revisit the previous example of error handling:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```go
```

	redisContent := []byte(fmt.Sprintf(failoverTemplate, name, size, size))
	
	err := sdk.WriteOutput("redis_failover.yaml", redisContent)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed to write output: %v", err)
	}
```

If the `WriteOutput` function fails, we want to ensure that an error in provisioning is surfaced in the status of the requested resource. Update the script with the following:

```bash
	redisContent := []byte(fmt.Sprintf(failoverTemplate, name, size, size))

	err := sdk.WriteOutput("redis_failover.yaml", redisContent)
	if err != nil {
#highlight-start
		status := kratix.NewStatus()
		status.Set("stage", "provisioning error")
		if err := sdk.PublishStatus(resource, status); err != nil {
			log.Fatalf("failed to publish status: %v", err)
		}
#highlight-end
		log.Fatalf("failed to write output: %v", err)
	}
```

> If an error occurs when writing the output, before exiting the container we are now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an error occurs when writing the output, this will ensure that before we exit the container, we are:
```
